* Scheme-CML: Concurrent ML for Scheme                  -*- outline -*-

This directory contains Scheme-CML, a Scheme implementation of John
Reppy's Concurrent ML (CML) concurrency abstraction.  For more details
on the original CML, see <http://cml.cs.uchicago.edu/>.

This code is reasonably portable, but, being a concurrency abstraction,
it relies on system-specific mechanisms for concurrency and consensus
on shared memory.

** Supported Schemes

Scheme-CML has already been ported to several Schemes already.

*** Scheme48

To load Scheme-CML into Scheme48, load the files s48-interfaces.scm and
s48-packages.scm into the config package.  See those files, and the
interfaces RENDEZVOUS-INTERFACE and RENDEZVOUS-*-INTERFACE, for more
details.

*** MIT Scheme on Unix

Loading Scheme-CML into MIT Scheme takes three steps, and requires a
MIT Scheme source tree with MIT Scheme built[*]:

1. Set up the directory by running

      sh mit-setup.sh interrupt /path/to/mit-scheme/src/

   The working directory must be the top-level Scheme-CML directory.

2. Compile Scheme-CML by loading mit-compile.scm.  (The working
   directory does not matter; mit-compile.scm uses the directory part
   of the pathname that you used to load mit-compile.scm.)

   At this point, you can check for some problems by looking in
   mit-rendezvous-unx.crf, which should be empty.

3. Load Scheme-CML by loading mit-load.scm.

Then the (RENDEZVOUS) package will contain everything CML-related.  For
more details, see mit-rendezvous.pkg.  If you want to clean out the
generated files in the directory, reverting all the effects of Steps 1
and 2, run

   sh mit-clean.sh

The first argument to mit-setup.sh was a choice of shared memory
consensus mechanism.  The choices are, in alphabetical order:

. interrupt - Each access to a shared object is done while interrupts
  are disabled, which inhibits other threads from running.  This is
  slightly safer than `mutex' because it also protects some data
  structures against C-g.

. mutex - Each shared object is protected by a mutex.

[*] Actually, all that is necessary is runtime-{os2,unx,w32}.pkd in the
    runtime/ subdirectory of MIT Scheme's source tree.

** Porting

The full details of the parameters needed to support Scheme-CML are
somewhat elaborate (and need to be written down more carefully), but
most of the details can be ignored.  There are five basic parts to the
parameters:

- Miscellaneous gobbledigook.
    (SPAWN <nullary-procedure> [<name>]) -> process
    (SLEEP <millisecond-duration>)
    (COMPOSE-NULLARY <procedure> <nullary-procedure>) -> procedure
    (COMPOSE-UNARY <procedure> <unary-procedure>) -> procedure

- Queues:
    (MAKE-QUEUE) -> queue
    (QUEUE-EMPTY? <queue>) -> boolean
    (ENQUEUE! <queue> <element>)
    (DEQUEUE! <queue>) -> element

- Critical sections and suspending & resuming threads.  See
  srfi-18-suspend.scm for a prototypical implementation.

- Locked record access.  See srfi-18-record.scm for a prototypical
  implementation.  Beware:  Some Scheme systems have broken hygienic
  macro engines that fail to hygienically rename top-level bindings, so
  that DEFINE-LOCKED-RECORD-TYPE as defined in srfi-18-record.scm may
  spuriously define variables named %CONSTRUCTOR and OBJECT.MUTEX at
  the top level, each use of DEFINE-LOCKED-RECORD-TYPE clobbering the
  previous definitions.  See mit-mutex-syntax.scm for an example of how
  to work around that.

- Timer rendezvous.  See mit-time.scm, s48-time.scm, or
  srfi-18-time.scm for prototypical implementations.

Additionally, Scheme-CML code uses the following SRFIs:

SRFI 1: List Library
SRFI 8: RECEIVE
SRFI 9: DEFINE-RECORD-TYPE
SRFI 23: ERROR
SRFI 32: Sort Libraries (only LIST-SORT!)

** scm-rendezvous

Scheme-CML exposes an interface identical to that of scm-rendezvous
(with the addition of CHOOSING-RENDEZVOUS* -- a unary equivalent of
CHOOSING-RENDEZVOUS, taking a list as its sole argument), but has a
very different internal implementation, rewritten from scratch, and its
internal interface to building rendezvous is completely different from
that of scm-rendezvous.  Thus, any code using POLLING-RENDEZVOUS or any
of the */CRITICAL procedures from scm-rendezvous will need to be
rewritten.
